Pollution contributes to the harmful environment that results in adverse effect on living beings. It is one of the major concern areas for the whole world. It is a global issue involving the United Nations, governments, voluntary institutions and the media.

Students need to be made fully aware of the adverse effects of rising pollution. Also, being the future generation, they can play a vital role in controlling pollution if they are familiar with this threat to the survival of mankind.

Here we are providing you some useful articles on pollution under various categories according to varying words limits. You can choose any of them according to your need:

 
Pollution Articles
Article on Pollution 1 (300 words)

Anything added into the environment that results in producing harmful or poisonous effect on living things is called pollution. Pollution is the process that makes nature’s resources such as land, water, air or other parts of the environment unsafe or unsuitable to use. Pollution can be of many types:  soil, air, water, thermal, radioactive, noise, and light. The toxins released are inhaled by each one of us while we breathe.

Pollution and its Causes

Inhaling poisonous air is as hazardous as smoking. It is not only the humans who are affected from this polluted environment but also the animals. Air is filled with highly toxic gases. These dangerous gases in environment are released by the power industries that burn fossil fuels, industries that dispose wastes in the water, farmers using pesticides, high usage of artificial lights and loud sounds, etc. Each of these leads to generation of the life threatening cause – pollution.

Any use of natural resources at a rate higher than the nature’s capacity to restore itself can result in pollution of air, water, and land. Other than human activities, there are a few periodic natural cycles that also result in release of dangerous stuff. Natural activities other than the human activities like volcanic eruption, dust wildfires, etc also result in creation of pollution.

Globalization is another major cause of pollution. Globalization has become an effective facilitator of environmental degradation.

Conclusion

Every individual owns certain responsibility of maintaining few points such as not throwing garbage all around, growing trees, using public transport instead of their own, etc. We must shun excessive consumption and avoid careless and deliberate disposal of post-consumption waste resources which could otherwise be recycled and would led to pollution control.

Pollution cannot be reduced or controlled if a sense of responsibility towards our Mother Earth is not felt by all concerned.
Article on Pollution 2 (500 words)

Pollution is a process of making the environment dirty, unhealthy and unsuitable for humans and animals to live. It is caused due to the release of both tangible and intangible contaminants. These can be released naturally or by humans themselves accidentally or deliberately.

More than 200 million people are affected due to toxic pollutants. Due to pollution, there are few countries that have faced defected child birth and increase in mortality rate. Humans are regularly exposed to pollution when they inhale toxic air inside them.

Pollution can be controlled, if not eliminated. Efforts such as promoting green environment, proper disposal of waste, etc are simple steps that lead to great emphasis on maintaining the order of environment.

Preventive measures:

    Plant trees/cultivate garden to curb polluted air and release more oxygen.
    Switch off electricity-based equipments when not in use: lights, fans, machines, etc.
    Make high use of natural energy than electric energy: dry the clothes naturally.
    Use recyclable products, wherever possible.
    Avoid plastic bags and use paper bags.
    Avoid wastage of paper and use both the sides.
    Restrict usage of hazardous chemicals.
    Don’t overuse heaters and air conditioners.
    Use public transport to reduce noise, air and light pollution.
    Protect Mother Earth by not spilling oil, garbage, sewage water, etc at undesirable places.
    Stop burning of crackers during marriages, Diwali, etc.
    Don’t dispose off eatables, packaging in oceans, rivers, etc.

Pollution disturbs our ecosystem and the balance in the environment. By following the above simple points, we all can restrict pollution at our own level.

Each year millions of people die due to various diseases caused by pollution. The key to live a healthy life is to protect the environment from pollution.

The increase in the pollution level over the years by human and natural causes has caused severe damage to the earth’s ecosystem. Lifestyle, habitat, etc everything is being adversely affected. Though natural causes cannot be stopped, but human beings’ accidental and deliberate actions can easily be stopped which surely will result in the control of pollution generation.

Types of Pollution:

Major pollutions and their causes:

    Land Pollution – Wastes collated at Earth’s surface, garbage on roads, industrial debris, pesticides, insecticides, etc. Unwanted wastes lying and being decomposed release harmful gases and lead to pollution.
    Water Pollution – Wastes disposed of in rivers, oceans act as pollutant in water bodies. Raw sewage, oil spills, chemical refuse, etc create poisonous water and hence lead to water pollution.
    Air pollution – Burning of fossil fuels, release of gases from vehicles release mono-oxide, carbon-di-oxide, industrial pollution, nuclear radiations etc lead to air pollution.
    Noise Pollution – Vehicle horns, loud music, construction machinery sounds, and other human activities create noise. This affects humans and animals, their natural vegetation and create Noise Pollution.
    Thermal Pollution – Manufacturing activities lead to rise in the temperature of water and land. This affects marine and plant life. Such activities lead to thermal pollution.

Article on Pollution 3 

Pollution today poses a major threat to the survival of the world we live in. Smoke or dust released in the air is the major type of pollution as it is extremely bad for the humans as it directly affects the lungs. Sewage, harmful content in drinking water is another major type of pollution that makes people unhealthy and ill because it contains disease-causing germs and viruses.

The environmental consequences of sudden rapid industrialization have resulted in various incidents of land, air and water resources sites being contaminated with toxic materials and other pollutants, threatening humans and ecosystems with serious health risks.

During manufacturing and construction activities every bit of natural resources is exploited to covert these into goods that fulfil the needs of the countries. A major cause for all the causes listed above is the manufacturing that leads to major types of pollution.

People living next to a building site where there is too much noise and construction activities rigorously going on tend to fall sick.

Pollution can be considered as direct or indirect change in any component of the biosphere that is harmful to the living components and in particular undesirable for humans, affecting adversely the industrial progress, cultural and natural assets or general environment of living society.

The biggest irony of all this is that even if we know that the earth is getting polluted, ultimately it is the human beings themselves who dig their own grave by doing deliberate activities because of which pollution is caused. It does not only spoil human beings’ health but also worsen their quality of life.

Role of the Government:

The Government has launched various pollution prevention policies and Acts that focus on preventing and controlling pollution by random means such as the following:

Adoption of clean and low waste technology, reusing and recycling, environment audit and pollution monitoring activities, reducing hazardous materials at source wherever feasible, promoting recycling of waste, etc.

There has also been a concept called “Pollution prevention approach” that seeks to increase the efficiency of a process reducing the amount of pollution generated at its source.

To give effect to the government policies, various steps have been initiated which include statutory stringent regulations, development of environmental standards, control of pollution generated through vehicles, spatial environmental planning including industrial estates and preparation of zoning atlas.

The policy statement for reduction of pollution lays emphasis on preventive aspects of pollution decline and promotion of technologies that help to reduce pollution.

Pollution control is a recent environmental concern. The Government in order to evade pollution has encouraged industries to regard ‘pollution’ as an economic problem and take reasonable actions to control the release of polluted/toxic/harmful gases at their end.

Few major pollution control measures undertaken by the government are:

    Implementation of waste minimization techniques and adoption of appropriate pollution control measures.
    Spreading awareness messages through programs on usage of cleaner technologies and pollution control.
    Assistance for sustainable development.
    Ban on usage of plastic bags, creation of paper bags.
    Creation of no-honking zones.
    Policy of creating industrial sites away from the city.
    Creation of garbage stacks so as to avoid littering on land.

In order to fight this life threatening effects of pollution, vigorous efforts should be made. Anti-pollution laws should be strictly implemented. In order to check water pollution, sewage and the factory wastes should be properly disposed off and vehicles should be made eco-friendly.

Environmental pollution is a global problem today. Public awareness is a must to prevent pollution. Population control will also help to save the world from environmental pollution. Scientific exploitation of natural resources is yet another step to prevent environmental pollution.

 
Article on Pollution 4 (800 words)

Pollution is an act of contaminating the environment by introducing certain hazardous contaminants that lead to disturbance of ecosystem and directly or indirectly affect the human beings, animals, plants of the ecosystem. Pollution causes the disturbance of the natural system and balance of environment.

Pollution is an undesirable change in the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of air, water and soil that may harmfully affect life or create potential health hazard of any living organism. Technological advancements done by humans are also one of the main reasons of pollution on the Earth.

Various types of pollution are caused, but mainly the following lead to life threatening and adverse effects on the humans:

    Air Pollution

The most dangerous and common type of pollution, caused by release of harmful gases in the air. It is majorly caused due to the direct release of chemicals into the environment by industries. The polluted air we breathe goes into our whole body and affects all the body systems mainly the respiratory functions.

Causes of Air Pollution: Burning of fuels, smoke from vehicles, fireworks, burning of woods, and release of hazardous chemicals or chemical gases from industries or factories.

Effects of Air Pollution: Air pollution causes life threatening diseases like asthma, cancer, bronchitis, lung disorder, and many more. Depletion of ozone layer is also a cause of air pollution.

Solutions to prevent Air Pollution: Conserve energy, stop fireworks, reduce-reuse-recycle, usage of energy efficient equipments, usage of public transport, etc.

    Soil Pollution

Release of harmful substances in soil is the major cause of contamination of soil. Soil pollution causes an indirect damage to humans and other animals. The nutrients taken by the plants are then transferred to the consumers that depend on these plants. Hence a soil consisting of contaminants will not only affect the plants growing on the soil but it will also indirectly harm the entire food chain.

Causes of Soil Pollution: Release of industrial wastes from large factories or industries, release of chemical wastes, agricultural chemicals, deforestation, use of pesticides, mining activities, burning of trees or plants, etc.

Effects of Soil Pollution: Soil pollution causes direct effect on plants growth, soil fertility, change in soil structure, toxic dusts, and chronic health problems to humans.

Solutions to prevent Soil Pollution: Reduce the use of plastics, reduce wastes, crop organic foods without using fertilizers and pesticides, use of biodegradable products, place liquid chemicals in the spill-proof containers, solid waste treatment, reuse and recycle things, etc.

    Water Pollution

Major part of the Earth’s surface is covered with water and more than half of the total population of the species reside in water. Water is one of the most important natural resources for humans and natural vegetation to survive. Water used from a polluted lake directly contaminates its user.

Causes of Water Pollution: Direct incorporation of hazardous pollutants, Disposal of wastes in water from factories and industries, garbage disposal by humans in rivers, etc.

Effect of Water Pollution: Water creatures are on the verge of extinction, drinking contaminated water causes serious health disorders, etc.

Solutions to prevent Water Pollution: Don’t throw waste or rubbish in the rivers, oceans, use water wisely, don’t throw oil, medicines, harmful liquids in the water, buy environmentally safe liquids for cleaning purpose, etc.

    Noise Pollution

Increase in noise level leads to Noise Pollution. It is not caused due to release of chemicals or toxins or hazardous gases but is just the loud noise generated in the environment. Noise is defined as the unpleasant sound that has an adverse effect on the human ear. Though the causes of this pollution are unlike others, but the effect of this pollution is as hazardous as other types of pollutions. It directly penetrates into human minds and leads to mental disorders as a major result.

Causes of Noise Pollution: Major cause is the honking of moving vehicles, loud music, running of machines at sites, radio, TV, etc.

Effect of Noise Pollution: Psychological illness, bad behaviour, irritation, hypertension, depression, forgetfulness, annoyance, stress, aggression and many more. It not only affects humans but also animals and many times lead to their cause of death due to unbearable level.

Solutions to prevent Noise Pollution: Obey the rule of no-honking until and unless necessary, construction of soundproof rooms for the heavy machines, no misuse of loudspeakers, growing trees along with roads are some of the ways to absorb sound.

Conclusion:

With the rising rate of pollution over the years, there is a worrisome increase in the rate of human diseases, and death rate of humans, various animals and plants on earth. Though pollution is released both by natural and human activities, but majorly it is created due to human activities, which can easily be minimized to reduce the pollution rate.
